---
layout: post
title: PAMS
date: 2024-06-06 21:35 +0800
categories:
- SUTD
tags:
- project
toc: true
comments: true
math: false
mermaid: false
---
## About

This is our Capstone project, equivalent to a final year project in other universities. The project is a collaboration with KLASS Engineering and Solutions.

Personnel and Artefact Monitoring System (PAMS) is an anti-theft solution that utilises reliable, robust technology for precise, real-time localisation of personnel and sensitive objects within specified environments. PAMS is designed to provide security and enhance operational efficiency. It is both scalable and cost-efficient. It also integrates with existing network infrastructures to provide detailed analytics, enabling effective resource monitoring and management across various sectors.

## Things I did

All things begin with research. Once we knew we were to do an IoT project, during our first meeting, the engineers began excitedly talking about the hardware design, and the computer science students began discussing the backend and frontend. However, they slowly got out of their initial buzz and realised they needed something to connect the two. As they already had ideas in their passionate components, I melded into the role to fill that gap, even though it was my first time dealing with such a task. Without knowing anything initially about how IoT devices connected, Google became my best friend.

Through initial research, I got exposed to different communication protocols and system architectures of middlewares and edge computing. The choice of middleware architecture was crucial as it would determine the scalability and flexibility of the system. I also had to consider the security of the system, as it would be handling sensitive data. I had to ensure that the middleware could handle the data securely and efficiently.

The architecture also determined the protocol choice. I had to consider the trade-offs between the different protocols, such as MQTT, CoAP, and HTTP. I had to consider the overhead of the protocol, the security, and the reliability of the protocol. Overall, for our system, we chose MQTT as it was lightweight and had a publish-subscribe model, which was suitable for our system, and had great support as an IoT protocol.

After having this overview of the system through such thorough research on possible system architectures, I also realised that data sent throughout the system has to be in a format that is understandable across components, across programming langauges. This led me to research on data serialisation formats. I had to consider the overhead of the format, the ease of use, and the compatibility of the format. I had to consider the trade-offs between JSON, XML, and Protocol Buffers. I had to consider the overhead of the format, the ease of use, and the compatibility of the format. Overall, for our system, we chose Protobuf for the hardware to middleware communication as it was lightweight and had a binary format, which was suitable for our system, and had great support as an IoT protocol. As for software, a component took in the Protobuf data and converted it to JSON for the frontend to consume, as JSON was more human-readable, and more suitable for the JavaScript frontend.

Throughout the stages of development, I was involved in helping my teammates standardise the architecture and the data formats, along with my own middleware portion. I enforced that all components chosen by everyone must be compatible with security protocols, out of my own stubbornness that an application used for security should be secure itself. Along with a teammate, we performed this role of ensuring all components were compatible with common security protocols, such as TLS. A secure prototype was not required by the client, but we took this effort anyway to ensure that the system was secure from the start. Our submitted prototype did not have security features, but we had a separate branch that had some proof-of-concept security features implemented, which included bash scripts to automate the generation of certificates and keys, and the configuration of some components to use TLS.

## Learnings

My lack of experience in IoT and middleware development was a challenge, but the thorough initial research proved to be very helpful and prevented a lot of possible setbacks. I also learned that communication is key in a team, as I had to communicate with the engineers to understand the hardware design, and the computer science students to link up and understand the backend and frontend.

This is a long project, lasting a whole 2 semesters, and I learned that it is important to pace myself and not burn out. I had to manage my time well, as I had to balance this project with my other modules. All teammates also juggled their different modules, so I also learned that it is important to be understanding and flexible with everyone's schedules. A long project also meant that friction could arise, but I learned that it is important to communicate and resolve conflicts quickly, as we had to work together for a long time.

This project taught me a lot about working with people with very different attitudes and viewpoints. I learned that it is important to be open-minded and to listen to everyone's opinions, as everyone has their own expertise and perspective. I also learned that it is important to be patient and to explain things clearly, as not everyone has the same background knowledge. I also learned that it is important to be proactive and to take initiative, as there were many times where I had to take the lead in certain areas, such as the middleware architecture.

My teammates are a great bunch indeed. I hope we stay friends.